# Is the execution plan generated by the LLM plausible?
When comparing and visualizing the execution plan received by the EXPLAIN Keyword to the Output of ChatGPT, we can see fundamental differences.
This can explicitly be demonstrated by comparing the number of created CTEs: PostgreSQL has created one CTE.
However, ChatGPT assumes the creation of four CTEs and therefore differs highly in the assumed complexity.
The chronology of steps performed in PostgreSQL is different to the order of steps identified by ChatGPT.
Regarding the plausibility of the LLM execution plan we can summarize that the general logic behind the Input query can be mirrored by the execution plan.
Yet, the actual real-time execution on the given data results in a different executional order and logic.
Hence, the plausibility of the LLM is not given regarding the physical query execution.
Further the execution plan generated by the LLM does not provide any cost estimates for the steps, which can be crucial in optimizing queries.

# How helpful were additional explanations provided by the LLM (if any)?
We found that the explanations provided by the LLM did not provide more insight into the execution plan than the actual plan itself.
One benefit we saw was the split between operation and scan type which made reading the query slightly simpler at a first glance.
Second were the explanations of the operations, which were helpful to understand the general logic behind the execution plan.
However, we assume that these explanations can be added to the original execution plan by ChatGPT to make it more understandable.
In contrast to ChatGPT, PostgreSQLs plan included detailed cost estimates for each step.
As ChatGPT has no access to our database, this information is ultimately not accessible through the LLM Output.


# To what degree is query execution already automated in PostgreSQL?
PostgreSQL query execution already demonstrates a high Level of Automation (e.g. see: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/planner-optimizer.html).
This is done by using query planning and optimization to come up with an ideal/optimal execution plan.
Overall it can almost be compared to the automation in compilers.
No contribution from the user and therefore no skills is needed to optimize the query.
Also, no monitoring and is needed and the oversight is can not be done by the user.
Lastly there is no training for the optimizer needed, as the rules are coded into the optimizer.


# Are there any fundamental differences between the query development tasks from Tasks 1 and 2 and the creation of a query execution plan that may have implications regarding automation?

Based on These reflections we can infere that LLMs may not be the ideal tool for execution plan creation.
The LLM bases the execution plan solemnly on the written SQL query, if no further information are given.
Adding information on the schema or even extraxts to the full database may reduce this problem slightly.
However, the LLM does not have any further information on query planning and optimization implied by PostgreSQL, full database sizes, or hardware implications.
Overall the degree of automation in query execution is already very high in PostgreSQL, which is the reason why the LLM is not able to provide a plausible execution plan.

However, Looking at the Tasks 1 and 2, the LLM has proven to be a great automation solution if time - and not the gain of knowledge on SQL - is of the essence.
The degree of automation is lower in these tasks, as the results needs to be tested and understood by the user.
A possible reason is the potential endless input space for each Task, which makes it hard to predict the correct output.
On the other side the input space for the creation of an execution plan is limited to the syntax provided by postgresql.


Conclusion:
We can conclude that creating an execution plan based on an LLM does not seem feasible.
Nonetheless, the LLM could be used to get a deeper understanding about the execution of a query if the plan obtained by the EXPLAIN Keyword is inserted into the prompt. 
For the creation of queries, the LLM has proven to be a great automation tool.